good afternoon and welcome to the
government's daily briefing on
coronavirus I'm pleased to be joined
this afternoon by Paul inkum the
director-general of border force and by
Sir Patrick valance our chief scientific
adviser firstly I'd like to update you
on the latest daily figures three
million two hundred and thirty one
thousand nine hundred and twenty one
tests for coronavirus have now been
carried out in the UK including one
hundred from forty thousand four hundred
and ninety seven tests carried out
yesterday two hundred and fifty four
thousand one hundred and ninety five
people have tested positive and that is
an increase of three thousand two
hundred and eighty seven cases since
yesterday nine thousand three hundred
and seven people are currently in
hospital with coronavirus that is down
14% from ten thousand seven hundred and
eighty one from this time last week and
sadly of those tested positive for
coronavirus across all settings 36
thousand three hundred and ninety three
people have now died that is an increase
of three hundred and fifty-one
fatalities since yesterday all our
thoughts prayers and deepest sympathies
remain with all those who have lost
their loved ones at this time of
national emergency it is crucial that we
continue to remain alert and save
countless more lives and that means
doing everything in our power to control
this terrible disease taking the right
action at the right time to prevent a
second deadly wave and that is why I'm
announcing today the next step in our
cross government approach and these
include temporary public health
restrictions at the border and let me
explain why we are bringing these
forward as other restrictions of course
finally started to ease following two
hard months of lockdown the answer as to
why we're bringing these measures in now
is simple it is to protect that hard-won
progress and prevent a devastating
resurgence in a sec
wave of the virus we are following the
science and introduced in public health
measures that are supported by Sage this
rule rule will require international
arrivals to self isolate for 14 days
that is the incubation period of the
virus so that if people have become
infected overseas we can limit the
spread of the virus at home and as we
are taking this action we are taking it
at a time when it will be the most
effective passengers arrivals have been
down by 99 percent compared to the
previous year now we are past the peak
of this virus we must take steps to
guard against imported cases triggering
a resurgence of this deadly disease and
as a transmission rate across the United
Kingdom Falls and the number of
travelers arriving in the UK begins to
increase imported cases could begin to
pose a larger and increased threat this
is because they could become a high
proportion of the overall number of
infections in the UK and therefore
increase the spread of the disease
so is far fewer people being infected in
this country and with the public having
worked so hard to bring the our number
down any new arrivals entering the
country with the disease during this
next phase will have a much bigger
impact potentially causing a second wave
now this is of course a different story
from when domestic transmission was at
its peak and when overseas travel was at
an all-time low led by the Prime
Minister the whole government has worked
across all government departments
including with the devolved
administration to develop these measures
and we do not take these steps lightly
this is extremely challenging and these
are difficult times for the entire
nation as our freedoms have been sadly
but necessarily curtailed but we do not
underestimate how hard these new
restrictions will be for people up and
down the country and also those who have
already sacrificed so much to help beat
and drive down the spread of korone
virus and I know that families both at
home and abroad are desperate to be
reunited but by taking these steps we
could save many
more lives by making it possible for
more family and more friends to safely
be reunited in the future we also
recognize how hard these changes will be
for our travel sector and leisure
sectors who are already struggling
through these unprecedented times so
across government we will continue to
work with them and support what is an
incredibly dynamic sector to find new
ways to reopen international travel and
tourism in a safe and responsible way we
will review these temporary public
health measures every three weeks to
ensure they remain the right ones for
our roadmap to recovery and these
measures will be introduced from the 8th
of June so that people arriving in the
UK will be required to self isolate for
14 days except for those on a short list
of exemptions arrivals will be required
to provide contact and address details
to help trace them should we need to and
given the amazing public spirit and the
level of compliance we have seen so far
we expect the vast majority of people to
do the right thing and comply with these
new requirements we know that the vast
majority of people will continue to act
responsibly to control the spread of
this virus and to stop a second wave but
we will not allow a small minority a
reckless minority to inject in dangerous
all so there will be penalties for those
who break these mandatory measures
border force will be on the front line
of implementing the changes with spot
checks as people arrive in the UK and
Paul Lincoln the director-general of
border force will shortly speak to us
and he'll provide an update on the steps
that people will need to take and I'd
also like to take this opportunity to
thank our border force staff and our
officers for the role that they will
play and for all that they are doing to
protect our nation at this deeply
challenging time we are working across
all four nations of the UK to make these
public health measures work but are now
turned to the enforcement approach that
is being taken here in England we will
conduct spot checks by mid June to
ensure that people are self isolating
and those from overseas who refuse to
comply could be refused entry public
health England will set up an assurance
service to contact people
at random to ensure that they understand
the requirements and to also ensure that
they are self isolating and our
outstanding police will continue to do
as they've done diligently across the
country to engage explain and encourage
people to follow the rules
we will empower them to use enforcement
as a last resort
so anyone breaking their 14 day
quarantine could face a penalty of 1000
pounds and that will be a fixed penalty
notice and ultimately that could also go
into potential prosecution and an
unlimited fine for failure to comply
with these sanctions we will keep these
penalties under review and we'll be
unafraid to increase them if that is
required but have no doubt we are taking
these measures at the right time because
we're serious about saving lives and
controlling the virus and we will be
guided by the science and the public
health of the public and the country
will always come first
which is why we are implementing these
restrictions at the border now our
absolute priority remains to stop the
spread of this infection to save lives
and to stop and prevent a second
dangerous wave of this virus that also
means supporting our NHS and making
short-term sacrifices together to stop
coronavirus taking more lives i'm now
going to hand over to paul income from
border falls who will update us he'll
provide an operational update but also
talk about the measures and how they
will be implemented thank you before we
consider the health measures of the
border let me start by paying tribute to
border force officers and staff saying
how proud I am for the professionalism
and dedication which has been shown
during this pandemic in some areas the
context of our work has changed this is
most prominent area of course is an air
passenger arrivals whereas the Home
Secretary has said at times they have
been down 99% compared with the previous
year but elsewhere the work has
continued relentlessly so despite the
threats and challenges posed by
coronavirus border force staff have been
working tirelessly day-in day-out in
ports and airports
hand in glove with operational partners
such as the National Crime Agency and
counterterrorism policing and this is to
keep the country safe and facilitate the
repatriation of UK nationals from abroad
throughout this crisis they've remained
on the frontline and they have needed to
organize crime groups and those who wish
to do the country harm take every
opportunity that every crisis provides
and we have seen some abhorrent attempts
to exploit vulnerable people as a result
of coronavirus so as an organization we
have turned to face the threat last
month alone border force seized more
than 700 kilograms of cocaine and heroin
destined for our streets some of which
were concealed inside shipments of face
masks in the last few days alone we see
significant amounts of contraband
including an ak-47 assault rifle
ammunition nearly half a million pounds
of illicit cash and 20 tons of smuggled
tobacco
we've also intercepted thousands of
counterfeit and coded 19 tests
continuing our battle against those who
are proliferating from this pandemic and
between the 21st of March and the 15th
of May our officers report referred 84
consignments of face masks to Trading
Standards as otherwise counterfeit or
otherwise below standard we're also
continuing to work against illegal
migration and in 2019 20 border fall
stopped over 30,000 illegal entry
attempts that are juxtaposed controls
overseas but as well as tackling these
criminal threats and working to keep
illicit shipments out the pandemic has
highlighted the importance of working to
expedite the entry of those items into
this country that the country critically
needs border force has facilitated the
importation of medical equipment and PPE
for the NHS for care homes and the
police as well as 220,000 laptops and
tablets which the Department for
Education are distributing to
disadvantaged children to ensure that
they can fully access remote education
and support it's also been important
that we could help British citizens to
come home and as part of that we were
supporting the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office with 469 repatriation flights
which brought home nearly 80,000 people
turning to the new measures that the
Home Secretary's announced however there
are five key points which I want to make
first is that we're ramping up
communications to make sure that anyone
traveling into the UK is aware of the
changes and the self isolation measures
which we put in place second we'll be
asking people to provide their contact
details travel plans and details of the
accommodation where they'll be self
isolating using an online form before
travel provided they are not in one of
the exempted groups the exempted groups
are primarily to meet the UK's
international obligations to provide the
continued security of supplying to the
UK and not to impede work such as
national security or critical
infrastructure the full list will be
published shortly on gothic aid but the
list of those not required to self
isolate includes those such as road
haulage and freight workers to ensure
the supply of goods is not impacted and
medical professionals who are traveling
to help with the fight against
coronavirus foreign officials who come
to the United Kingdom to work on
essential border securities such as the
French police who operate in our
controls and in the recognition of the
unique nature of the common travel area
as well as unique position of Northern
Ireland all journeys from within the
common travel area will also be absent
obtaining people's contract details
onward travel plans for public health
England and for the devolved
administration's will support the test
track at race and equivalent devolved
administration programs the more rapidly
we can identify and contact those at
risk of infection the more effectively
we can reduce the spread of the virus
third at the border there will be spot
checks conducted by border force
officers any obvious errors will trigger
a requirement for the passenger to
complete another form or potentially be
refused entry into the UK fourth
passengers will then be required to go
to their place of self IFAs isolation
and finally as the home secretary
mentioned there is the question of
enforcement with the potential penalties
for non-compliance of a hundred pounds
for the fixed penalty for not failing
for failing to complete perform and a
thousand pounds for breaching the terms
itself isolation and in extreme
circumstances border force officers do
reserve the right to refuse entry to any
non British or
non-residents who do not follow these
regulations given the high current
levels of compliance to date we expect
the vast majority of people will take
this seriously and do the right thing
we will however take enforcement action
against a small minority of people who
may disregard these actions and
therefore further endanger people's
lives the advice is quite clear if you
have the virus or if you're displaying
symptoms or if you've been in contact
with somebody with the virus you should
not travel to do so otherwise is
potentially putting people's lives at
risk we recognize as the Home Secretary
has said that bringing these measures
into force there are sectors such as the
travel industry who may have concerns
and we'll be working with them on the
detailed implementation in the coming
days and we'll also keep the measures
regularly under review we all look
forward to a time when travel is fully
back up and running and when it is
border for stand ready to provide a warm
welcome to the UK in the meantime it is
essential that we use the levers at our
disposal to ensure the safety of our
communities while still facilitating in
the critical trade into this country
Thank You Patrick
yes the first line please I want to
start with some numbers and on the
right-hand side of this slide is the are
and to remind you that is the number
that determines all is driven from the
number of individuals infected by one
infected person on average and so
uncontrolled this epidemic has an R of 3
means three people on average are
infected by one person and the epidemic
grows very rapidly if it's one then one
person is infected by one person and
it's flat we're currently at an R across
the UK of between 0.7 and 1 below 1 in
every area of the UK we think but
potentially quite close to one so the
epidemic is either flat or declining at
the moment in the UK and in most areas
it's declining as I will show you as the
epidemic becomes smaller there are two
numbers to concentrate on one is the R
and the other is the
number of infections and the number of
new infections on the left-hand slide
side of this slide are the numbers that
come from the Office for National
Statistics survey where they've been to
14 and a half thousand individuals and
taken swabs to see who's infected and
also to see over time who becomes
infected and that's in over seven
thousand households what that study
tells us is that in the two weeks from
May the 4th to May the 17th that nought
point to five percent so roughly two or
three out of a thousand people are
infected and have Cove aid that comes to
a number of about a hundred and thirty
seven thousand across the country it
could be a bigger than that or smaller
these have got wide confidence intervals
but that's the sort of number the second
important number is the number of new
infections so this is people every week
you're getting a new infection and here
the number looks like about 61 thousand
people per week at the moment which
turns out to be roughly one in a
thousand or so people every week are
getting an infection so that's the sort
of order we are the epidemic is
shrinking and the numbers will come down
but these are the numbers we need to
keep an eye on because the lower we can
get these numbers the more possible it
is to release measures and also to
operate the test trace and contain
system that's being put in place next
slide please
just to show you what this means and
I've said repeatedly that this slide is
difficult because the number of cases
tested here and the number of people are
positive isn't a reflection of the total
number I've just shown you in the
previous slide the total total number
but what you can see in this slide is
the number of tests being done per day
have gone up a lot in the pink columns
the number of people confirmed as a
result of that is going down in the
green and this is from 21st of March
where we saw the peak to the top and now
it's coming down so it's consistent with
the idea the number of infections in the
community are coming down day by day but
quite slowly for the reasons I've said
next slide please as you would expect
the number of people infected is going
down so are the number of people
admitted to hospital every day and here
you can see right the way across Wales
England Scotland Northern Ireland the
number of people in hospital coming down
and the number of people on mechanical
ventilators importantly are coming down
so we've got numbers of people in on
ventilators reducing the intensive care
patients and the number of admissions
here the graph shown for England coming
down over time each day reducing this is
an important indication that the
epidemic is shrinking next slide please
people in hospital with the disease are
also reducing and here you can clearly
see the peak when you look at these
graphs going from the 20th of March
through to the 21st of May most obvious
in London where you can see a peak
occurring around the beginning of April
and then coming down now day by day and
you can see it's a bit flatter in other
places so it's not decreasing at exactly
the same rate across the country but
wherever you look it is decreasing
there's clearly some work to be done to
make sure it's decreasing everywhere and
these last few numbers are going to be
hard to get down but we've got to keep
trying to push them down the lower the
numbers the better next slide please
and as you would hope and expect that as
those numbers come down infections
people admitted to hospital people in
hospital people on ventilator beds so
the number of deaths reduce as well and
this shows the number of deaths from the
Department of Health and Social Care
numbers they're a little bit higher if
you look at the office for national
statistics numbers because these are
only Kovac confirmed and the ONS numbers
can contain suspected as well but what
you can see here is a clear again a peak
that occurred with a reduction now in
the number of deaths and I just want to
pause here to say this peak is an
artificial peak it's a peak that we
managed to suppress by the things that
you have all done we have all done to
adhere to social distancing the risk is
that if we move too fast and do things
in the wrong way we get a second peek
that would look exactly the same and
that's what we've got to avoid last
slide please
so as a reminder as some of the rules
around this are relaxed it's important
that we do maintain the social
distancing and we do maintain the rules
around distance between people and our
interactions and it's really quite
encouraging to see that still we've got
good information good knowledge that
actually people are adhering to this on
the whole and of course it's also the
case that people are able to do more
because the relaxation of rules and
that's important as well for other
health reasons
so everything pointed in the right
direction are between 0.7 and 1 numbers
coming down but we need to keep on with
it and we need to make sure that we
don't relax at the wrong time and end up
with a recurrence and a growth again of
this epidemic Thank You Patrick thanks
very much thank you that's very very
clear I'm now going to move on to
questions and the first question is from
Emma from Wilden what guidance and
advice do you have the couples who have
weddings booked
where thousands of pounds in August and
September what number we put on a small
gathering so for those who didn't quite
hear that question the question was what
guidance and advice you have for couples
have booked weddings now I'm going to
speak about I've got friends who've also
booked weddings and had to cancel
weddings I think we all know people
who've been in exactly the same
situation I think we've just heard from
Patrick who's spoken about making sure
that we take the right measures in
particular and to control the virus but
at the same time time now we know that
everything that we do in terms of not
just working to control the virus but
making sure we take individual
responsibility is absolutely crucial but
I think Patrick perhaps on this point of
gatherings
if you would like to just expand further
about the best advice because obviously
we're not encouraging gatherings at all
and we do want to make sure that we can
get into the position where people can
obviously get back to holding weddings
and
living living as long as he possibly
would like them to well the the science
advice on on transmission is obviously
related to the number of contacts you
have the closeness of that contact and
the duration of contact and particularly
we've been aiming to try and break
transmission between households and
across households and and other areas
because that's what's kept this under
control so as any decisions are made
about relaxing those sorts of guidelines
and one of the things that's happened is
a bit of realization in terms of
outdoors where we know transmission is
much less likely but any decisions to
relax would need to be based on risk
based assessment and so the science can
provide some guidance but it can't
choose the number that obviously has to
be a policy decision in terms of how
government would like to take that
forward Thank You Patrick
we have the next question please this is
from Giovanna from Cambridge who asks
when will dentists open and how will
patients be safely treated people are
living in pain and delaying even smaller
a small problem can become a painful
emergency Patrick do you want to yes
this is really a health question science
one but but it is an important one and
it's clear that some professions are
more likely to be close to people for
long periods and you may get some sort
of aerosolization of some of the sputum
and so on so there are risks in certain
professions and dentistry is clearly one
of those where that might be the case
this is being looked at I know by the
chief medical officer in terms of what
could be done to reduce that and of
course dentists are health care
professionals who are used to working in
environments where there's an infection
risk so I know that this is being looked
at very carefully and I know that the
CMO and others are thinking about what
the guidance should be that would allow
this to happen and I absolutely
recognize that this is a key thing that
people want to see open for all the
reasons that that have been put by
Giovanni Thank You Patrick
can we now move on to questions direct
questions from the media first question
is from Tom barrage BBC good afternoon
Tom you know afternoon Home Secretary
I've got one
you please on the quarantine and then
another question from a colleague about
schools if I'm a home secretary now that
this measure is coming in is it fair to
assume now that most summer holidays
abroad will not happen this year and the
second question is while the risk to
children adjudged to be relatively low
if schools reopen to what extent might
they be more serious for families and
for the wider community
thank you Tom well I think you know it's
your first question of course you know
the advice is not about booking holidays
right now we're bringing in these
measures for very clear reasons as I
have already outlined this afternoon and
Paul Lincoln has also explained how
we're going to bring those measures in
the other point to note as well as of
course advice from government and the
Foreign and Commonwealth Office is you
not to travel then please follow the
advice that they are putting on their
website which is nothing but essential
travel so this is this is absolutely not
about booking holidays we have to be
clear about you know we want to avoid a
second wave and that is absolutely vital
and I think in terms of your second
question about schools and safety around
children reopening schools I think it's
really important to recognize right now
many of our schools are actually open
and many of those schools are doing
fantastic work obviously providing
schooling for children off key workers
but also equally as important vulnerable
children there are many many vulnerable
children hundreds of thousands o bobl
children who are safer in school in many
many cases but of course you've asked a
question about infection control and
families and that is of course something
that has to be looked at and very much
in a local setting at a localized level
but also following the advice from
governments and the scientific advice
the advice that we've heard from Patrick
and from other colleagues as well and
that is crucial and of course the
department education another colleagues
across government are working on this
and looking at this right now Patrick
did you want to add anything to that
so the question you're quite right to
frame it as that the risks for children
are of this disease are much lower we
know that they are very low risk but not
zero risk and there have been some
serious cases and children of course but
very few compared to adults and older
age groups the risk the broader risk in
terms of opening schools is that as soon
as you start to reintroduce any contact
then you put some pressure on the AR and
you put pressure on numbers and that's
true for anything that we're going to do
in terms of changes to contact the
judgment early on was that schools are a
relatively low parts of that that risk
although there are other consequentials
that happen as a result of opening
schools I mean in terms of people going
to business and other contacts which can
add to that so there are various
scenarios that can make risk lower or
higher things like safe environments are
important things like class size things
like the amount of face-to-face contact
and these are things on which we've
given science advice on which policy can
then be determined but it's worth
absolutely reflecting that the overall
risk if you look at it is not one that
you pick up as a as a high risk area for
our unlike for example at the point that
was just made around dentistry for
example where it rotates but it's not
zero I mean there clearly is a
consequence of reintroducing any form of
increased contact thank you
Tom I'm now going to move on to Sam
Coates from Sky News Sam good afternoon
secretary of state two questions about
this summer now 12 days ago the
governments of France and Britain issued
a joint statement which said no
quarantine measures were deployed
travelers coming from France at this
stage today in what you've announced
there's no exemption from France can you
tell us what's changed over the last 12
days and also today Downing Street
revealed that they're also looking at
easing the measures you're putting in
place today by looking at airbridges
there seem to be being pushed by
transport secretary Grant Shapps
be honest are you as keen on that as him
and if so when's the earliest they could
come in and - Patrick valence sage
advice on education actually seems to
make pretty depressing reading if you're
asking the question when school is going
to be back up and running completely
back to the way that they were in
January do
think schools will be fully up and
running in September or should parents
start to realize that that's just not
going to happen Sam thank you well first
of all on France I can say to you
directly and to the country as well that
over the last 12 days myself and other
colleagues in government in fact I I
speak to my French counterpart
frequently on a range of issues and I've
also been involved in many of these
discussions fact of the matter is is
that we have been working closely with
the French government and authorities
border force have also been involved in
finalizing much of these arrangements
there are limited exemptions and that's
in the list that will be published this
afternoon
which when it comes to France involves
frontier workers and preserves the
critical supply of goods which is
exactly what we have been discussing
with our French counterpart some 12 days
ago and have continued to do so and will
continue to engage closely with our
French colleagues we do that all the
time across government and that is the
right thing to do while also keeping
this list and all measures as I've
already said in my statement earlier
under review and you've asked again
about travel which I can fully
appreciate and understand the nation
wants to start getting back to live in a
normal life in the best possible way
hoping to look forward to the summer and
potentially travel all on holiday I've
already said the fact of the matter is
there is we're not advising when it
comes to travel and the Foreign Office
advice is very clear nothing but
essential travel and when it comes to
air bridges look I think we should be
absolutely open to all ideas this is not
for today but this doesn't mean we
should rule this out in the future and
the fact of the matter is I spoke in my
statement in my remarks earlier on about
the travel industry the leisure sector
aviation we're at the forefront of a
really dynamic aviation sector in our
country aviation is in fact the
lifeblood when you think about it
keeping people moving but keeping Goods
moving as well so we will look at all
options and I and the Secretary of State
for Transport you know will work with
sectors and the industry to look at how
we can naturally get the sector moving
again but it's important to emphasize
we have to do this in the right way in a
practical way in a responsible way and
in a pragmatic way but also when the
time is right and if I think actually we
will now look forward to engaging them
to develop a plan as to how we can do
that I think we should be looking to
lead the world when it comes to reopen
in aviation but that's going to take
time Sam and I think you've also heard
that from Patrick today Patrick well
just to build on that Chris Witte has
said and I agree with him this is not a
three-month epidemic this is a long-term
thing that we need to deal with that
will require some form of social
distancing over a longer period until we
get some form of treatment or vaccine or
other intervention which allows us to
manage it another way so this is a
long-term thing I'm not going to
speculate on on when decisions will be
made by government on on schools that's
for government to decide but I will say
a few words about what the sorts of
considerations are they're important the
lower we get the numbers of new
infections each week the greater the
chance of being able to do things the
more effective systems like tests race
and container the more room you have to
make other changes the more we can
modify environments to be useful to keep
appropriate social distancing the better
things are so there are a number of ways
in which decisions can be made based on
good scientific principles that allow
you to decide when to do things and
they're dependent on those scientific
principles and the time at which the day
to tell you that you've got the room to
do them and those are the sorts of
things that I think will need to be
looked at in order to make these
decisions and of course it's really
important to remember that within all of
that the basic hygiene things that we've
talked about that we can sometimes
forget hand-washing
making sure that we don't forget about
that as a route of transmission become
an important part of this so I think
those are the considerations and then
it's obviously important that schools
have to get back for education for young
people at some point and the question is
how you factor those things in in order
to be able to make the decision of right
time in an era where we're going to have
social distancing for some time
Sam thanks very much I'm now going to
move on to Liz Bates from channel 4
let's good afternoon Liz you are mute
okay go ahead yes I have two presses on
the quarantine if you don't mind first
of all if people come into the UK and
they don't have somewhere to quarantine
for two weeks what happens to them where
do they go and secondly if this is a
message that as you said is going to
save lives then why is it starting in
June why are we not starting to save
lives immediately
Liz thank you for your questions well I
think first of all on your last question
as I outlined in the statement quite
clearly we said very clearly now that as
the number of infections within the UK
drops we have to now manage the risk of
external transmission so more people are
now traveling obviously because other
countries are bringing in their own
measures in terms of opening up their
own countries in society and so this is
now about managing the risk of
transmissions being reintroduced from
elsewhere so that's really vital and
that's why we're bringing the measures
in now we want to reduce the risk of
imported cases being introduced to the
UK and to prevent and stop a second wave
of this dreadful virus on your question
on quarantine quarantine Ian and people
having somewhere to stay well I think
it's important to reflect and recognize
right now
and the number of people have travelling
to the UK are at an all-time low
99% down compared to this time last year
Paul Lincoln director-general for border
force has already said in his statement
too that this will come in I've said
this on the 8th of June we are
effectively now working to communicate
obviously around the world but through
all the appropriate channels what the
processes are that people will need to
do the steps of completed locator form
and also to provide data and to get
ready to if they do want to come to the
UK they need to have that accommodation
that is vital and that is very clear in
terms of the proposal that we are
outlining
Paul would you I said I can build on
that I have circuitry I mean there's the
statement itself says that if you are
unable to provide your own accommodation
then we will arrange as government
accommodation for you which will be at
your expense and we have a service which
we can provide in the very limited
circumstances where people come in and
they don't have accommodation
you'll be we're aware by the way that we
already use immigration and other powers
and if people do not have suitable means
and they are not capable of paying for
their own way in the country if they're
a foreign national then they are usually
removed so we have these processes in
place already this is a relatively
routine thing to be able to take forward
thank you Paul
I'm now going to move on to Gordon
Rayner from The Telegraph Gordon good
afternoon afternoon Secretary of State
thank you the government is trying to
build a global Britain initiative and
attract investment into Britain at the
moment to take advantage of Briggs it
when we finally fully is there not a
danger that in imposing this quarantine
scheme at a time when the rest of the
world is doing the opposite you're
telling potential investors that
Britain's closed for business
encouraged us the scientists to explain
to people watching this why we need to
put people under house arrest for two
weeks effectively rather than saying
them to be tested perhaps or coronavirus
and could people be who tested positive
for antibodies be exempted from the
scheme Gordon thank you I'll start with
your first question which is absolutely
a legitimate question we are of course
global Britain and our aspiration as we
leave the EU is to be a dynamic player
in the world obviously more than open
for business but securing our way when
it comes to trade and all sorts of
investment opportunities going forward
the fact of the matter is I think we
have to put this into context right now
as I've said already international
travel to the UK has declined
dramatically by 99 percent there are
some very clear exemptions that a bit
those lists that list has been published
this afternoon I'm critical workers
infrastructure workers key categories
are there these measures will be kept
under review and I really do want to
emphasize that we are not shutting down
completely we are
closing our borders and I think that
people need to recognize that what we
are seeking to do is we are seeking to
control the spread of the virus because
we do not want a second wave of this
virus and if I may before I hand over to
Patrick Gordon there are some other
points here to note as well this will
come in place on the 8th of June and
between now and then we'll be working
with various industries but also we will
continue to work across government with
public health England with the
Department of Health and Social Care to
look at you know track and trace testing
by the time this comes together we would
love to have and of course we want to
have a plethora of tools that can
effectively support these measures of
poor intoning but also post these
measures help us to look at how we can
in this measured and responsible way
open society in the long course it'll
much much much longer term but in the
right way obviously based upon the size
based on driving the our value down in
the United Kingdom but first and
foremost we must prevent a second wave
of this disease and that's why we're
bringing these measures in from the 8th
of June Patrick let me answer Ted the
testing questions generally about
testing so the reason that a negative
test is not very predictive is if you've
just caught the disease you incubate it
for a few days when you will test
negative you start to test positive
maybe at around 5 days sometimes a bit
longer sometimes a bit sooner
and you may be shedding a lot of virus
for a couple of days then and for a few
days afterwards and then you gradually
recover and may not shed so clearly it
depends on the time at which you caught
the infection as to when you should
expect a positive test and that means
that just testing somebody and saying
you're negative doesn't tell you whether
somebody's just about to get it in a
week's time so that's the reason for
thinking about testing in that way and
your second question about antibody
testing
we're much more positive that people who
get infections do mount an antibody
response I think that's really quite
clear now the vast majority of people do
get an antibody response and we know
that some of those antibody responses at
least and maybe all of them but we don't
know that for sure but certainly some of
them are so-called neutralizing
antibodies in other words they would
expect you'd expect that to have an
effect in terms of viral infection and
transmission what we don't know is how
long that lasts for and we don't know
how effective that is in terms of either
preventing transmission or infant in
preventing infection so there's still
work to be done to understand this isn't
just in the UK this is globally to
understand the significance of a
positive antibody test it's likely that
it confers some degree of protection but
we just don't know and we don't know
whether it confers your if your might
immunity against being able to harbor
the virus and transmit it so I think
until we've got answers to those
questions and there's work going on now
that hopefully will give answers to
those questions and I think to start
talking about immunity passports and
assuming that an antibody positivity
gives you complete protection is is
really very premature thanks Patrick I'm
going to move on now to Harrison Jones
from Metro Harrison good afternoon
afternoon prezzy thank you
this week the public have been blamed as
huge crowds of people strong to social
distance of beauty spots notably beaches
but was that not actually inevitable
given that the government told people
they could travel wherever they liked
and sunbathe and what's your message to
local authorities don't necessarily have
the infrastructure to safely support
huge crowds and more if I may
yesterday you described those working in
the NHS and social care as heroes many
of those heroes were born abroad and we
clapped them every week but what a
better way of showing our thanks to
those following key workers saving lives
including the Prime Minister's be making
them eligible for British citizenship
Harrison thank you so first of all with
regards to
first comment about beauty sports local
authority public behaviors while look I
mean we're heading into a bank holiday
weekend and the weather is good this is
a beautiful time of the year as we all
know and we all enjoy being outdoors I
think the fact of the matter is the
British public have been incredible
absolutely incredible both in terms of
their resilience but also the way in
which they have naturally continued to
comply with social distancing with
government guidelines followed the
advice
follow the health advisors continued on
the public on the hygiene advice as well
and that's been vital as we've seen from
the graphs that Patrick showed earlier
on in terms of moving past the peak and
now trying to reduce and control the
spread of this virus I think it's
absolutely vital and important that we
continue to do that it is inevitable but
obviously the public will be out and
about a lot more but of course our
message is clear for the public yes
enjoy being outdoors we have encouraged
people to go out but we have put a very
clear caveat around that and this is all
conditional you can enjoy being outdoors
in the Sun providing you are following
the advice and we continue to stop and
contain the spread of the infection the
second point about local authorities is
of course we are we are seeing this now
become a discussion much more about
different parts of the country and the
localization of behaviors but also
controlling the spread of this disease
too and local authorities have an
enormous role to play and they are I pay
tribute to them in terms of the work
that they are doing and they've had a
great deal of government support also in
terms of putting in practical measures
to to continue to support people in the
community and to control the spread of
the virus but what I would say is
obviously we've got to stick with this
okay we've all made big sacrifices we do
not want to go back to where we started
before and there is still much more work
to do
and in answer to your question yes about
our NHS heroes and those who are quite
frankly working day and night right now
to save lives and to continue to do
amazing work in the NHS I've said from
day one actually the last time that I
was here on this podium that we keep all
our immigration measures
under review given these unprecedented
times and challenges I'm also gonna say
primarily because I did introduce the
immigration and social security bill in
the House of Commons this week as well
which is all about bringing in a
points-based system our migration system
is incredibly complex and I think this
crisis has demonstrated that and showing
the extent of that conflict complexity -
you've mentioned citizenship and changes
that we could bring it in that would
need legislation going forward but as I
said we keep everything under review I'm
now going to go over to rob Merrick from
the independent Rob good afternoon good
afternoon thank you Home Secretary and
in recent days you've made some
announcements that are being widely
welcomed to include hospital Porter's
and cleaners within the Reedman scheme
to waive the immigration surcharge for
health and care workers in each case the
government listen the government changed
its mind so will you now do the same to
give automatic visa these are extensions
to care workers and low-paid NHS staff
will risk in their lives at the
epicenter of this crisis why should
doctors and nurses get those automatic
extensions but not their colleagues Rob
thank you for your question and again as
I've just said already the work that
we're seeing across the NHS is just
absolutely incredible
and I've also just made the point as
well that you know this is difficult in
terms of we've seen the complexities
around immigration but right across the
immigration system through these
unprecedented times and challenges we
are supporting frontline health workers
social care workers and obviously we're
finding ways in which we can support
other care workers as well across the
NHS our immigration system is incredibly
complex and I've said that I'm looking
at various schemes we keep everything
under review I'm in fact this point was
made earlier this year as well with the
law commission's own report on
immigration rules where our system is
complex I want to simplify some of these
rules I really do and so we're now
looking at what changes we can bring in
very much in the same way as was
announced yesterday around changes to
the immigration health surcharge I'm
working across government with my
colleagues including the Department of
Health to look at what we can do in this
particular
space thank you Rob I'm now going to
bring this press conference to a close
but before I do I want to just pause to
remember those who fell victim to
something very different actually and
people that thought it seems too
incredibly despicable acts of terrorism
on this day three years ago on from the
Manchester Arena atrocity and seven
years after the horrific murder of Lee
Rigby
we remember the innocent victims who
were so viciously and so brutally struck
down my thoughts and all our thoughts
across the nation are with everyone who
lost their loved ones and suffered on
this incredible difficult day we will
always remember them thank you I was the
Home Secretary Priti Patel bringing
today's daily news briefing to a close
with a very somber a note of remembrance
of victims of a terror attack let's take
a quick look now at some of the key
details that she outlined during that
briefing them secretary outline plans
for a two-week quarantine which will be
imposed on new arrivals to the UK from
the 8th of June although this won't
apply to people coming from Ireland
medical staff tackling covert 19 and
also seasonal agricultural workers
people will be expected to travel to
their final UK destination by car where
possible and not use public transport on
arrival they shouldn't leave their
residents for 14 days and they shouldn't
have people to visit except to provide
essential support they'll also be
encouraged to download the NHS covert
19:00 app at the border
Priti Patel said the measures are being
introduced to try to prevent a second
wave of infection and that enforcement
will be taken against people who don't
comply with a thousand-pound fines the
Home Secretary also confirmed that a
further 351 people are known to have
died from the virus in all settings
taking the UK total death toll to 36,000
393 and she announced that a total
140,000 497 tests were carried out in
the UK in the past 24 hours now see the
headlines as they happen and watch BBC
news live in the app and get the full
story with BBC decoder UK forward slash
news follow the story for all the latest
with BBC News